---
title: References
aliases: 
date: 2024-09-28
tags: 
description: List of references used in the vault.
---
>[!warning] Generated by the [[Bibliography merge#Print full list of references from the merged library|script]] on **2024-09-28**

- **Asch, Mark and Bocquet, Marc and Nodet, Maëlle** (2016). *Data Assimilation*. {Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics}. 
- **Carrassi, A. and Bocquet, M. and Bertino, L. and Evensen, G.** (2018). *Data Assimilation in the Geosciences: An Overview of Methods, Issues, and Perspectives*. [DOI: 10.1002/wcc.535](https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.535)
- **Ciullo, Alessio and Martius, Olivia and Strobl, Eric and Bresch, David N.** (2021-01-01). *A Framework for Building Climate Storylines Based on Downward Counterfactuals: The Case of the European Union Solidarity Fund*. [DOI: 10.1016/j.crm.2021.100349](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2021.100349) 
- **Cowell, Robert G.** (2001). *Conditions under Which Conditional Independence and Scoring Methods Lead to Identical Selection of Bayesian Network Models*. [DOI: 10.48550/arXiv.1301.2262](https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1301.2262) - **Deisenroth, M.P. and Faisal, A.A. and Ong, C.S.** (2020). *Mathematics for Machine Learning*. Cambridge University Press. 
- **Fletcher, S.J.** (2023). *Data Assimilation for the Geosciences (Second Edition)*. Elsevier. 
- **Hazeleger, Wilco and Hurk, Bart and Min, Erik and Van Oldenborgh, Geert Jan and Petersen, Arthur and Stainforth, David and Vasileiadou, Eleftheria and Smith, Leonard** (2015-01-28). *Tales of Future Weather*. [DOI: 10.1038/nclimate2450](https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2450) 
- **Hoerling, Martin and Kumar, Arun and Dole, Randall and Nielsen-Gammon, John W. and Eischeid, Jon and Perlwitz, Judith and Quan, Xiao-Wei and Zhang, Tao and Pegion, Philip and Chen, Mingyue** (2013). *Anatomy of an Extreme Event*. [DOI: 10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00270.1](https://doi.org/10.1175/JCLI-D-12-00270.1) 
- **Matthews, T. and Mullan, D. and Wilby, R.L. and Broderick, C. and Murphy, C.** (2016-01-01). *Past and Future Climate Change in the Context of Memorable Seasonal Extremes*. [DOI: 10.1016/j.crm.2016.01.004](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.crm.2016.01.004) 
- **Natori, Kazuki and Uto, Masaki and Ueno, Maomi** (2017-09-20). *Consistent Learning Bayesian Networks with Thousands of Variables*. 
- **Richardson, L.F.** (1922). *Weather Prediction by Numerical Processes*. Cambridge University Press. 
- **Russell, S. and Norvig, P.** (2021). *Artificial Intelligence : A Modern Approach*. Pearson. - **Scutari, Marco** (2019-11-06). *Challenges in Bayesian Network Modelling of Climate and Weather Data*. - **Scutari, Marco and Vitolo, Claudia and Tucker, Allan** (2019-09-01). *Learning Bayesian Networks from Big Data with Greedy Search: Computational Complexity and Efficient Implementation*. [DOI: 10.1007/s11222-019-09857-1](https://doi.org/10.1007/s11222-019-09857-1) 
- **Scutari, Marco and Graafland, Catharina Elisabeth and Gutiérrez, José Manuel** (2019-12-01). *Who Learns Better Bayesian Network Structures: Accuracy and Speed of Structure Learning Algorithms*. [DOI: 10.1016/j.ijar.2019.10.003](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijar.2019.10.003) 
- **Shepherd, Theodore G.** (2016-03-01). *A Common Framework for Approaches to Extreme Event Attribution*. [DOI: 10.1007/s40641-016-0033-y](https://doi.org/10.1007/s40641-016-0033-y) 
- **Shepherd, Theodore G. and Boyd, Emily and Calel, Raphael A. and Chapman, Sandra C. and Dessai, Suraje and Dima-West, Ioana M. and Fowler, Hayley J. and James, Rachel and Maraun, Douglas and Martius, Olivia and Senior, Catherine A. and Sobel, Adam H. and Stainforth, David A. and Tett, Simon F. B. and Trenberth, Kevin E. and family=Hurk, given=Bart J. J. M., prefix=van den, useprefix=true and Watkins, Nicholas W. and Wilby, Robert L. and Zenghelis, Dimitri A.** (2018-12-01). *Storylines: An Alternative Approach to Representing Uncertainty in Physical Aspects of Climate Change*. [DOI: 10.1007/s10584-018-2317-9](https://doi.org/10.1007/s10584-018-2317-9) - **Shepherd, Ted** (2019-05-15). *Storyline Approach to the Construction of Regional Climate Change Information*. [DOI: 10.1098/rspa.2019.0013](https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2019.0013) - **Vitolo, Claudia and Scutari, Marco and Ghalaieny, Mohamed and Tucker, Allan and Russell, Andrew** (2018-04-01). *Modeling Air Pollution, Climate, and Health Data Using Bayesian Networks: A Case Study of the English Regions*. John Wiley \& Sons, Ltd. [DOI: 10.1002/2017EA000326](https://doi.org/10.1002/2017EA000326) 
- **Vyas, Nikhil and Kakade, Sham M. and Barak, Boaz** (2023-07-23/2023-07-29). *On Provable Copyright Protection for Generative Models*. PMLR. 
- **Washington, W. and Parkinson, C.** (2005). *An Introduction to Three-Dimensional Climate Modeling*. University Science Books. 
- **Woo, Gordon and Johnson, Neil F.** (n.d.). *Stochastic Modeling of Possible Pasts to Illuminate Future Risk*. Oxford University Press. 
- **Woo, Hye-Jin and Park, Kyung-Ae** (2020). *Inter-Comparisons of Daily Sea Surface Temperatures and In-Situ Temperatures in the Coastal Regions*. [DOI: 10.3390/rs12101592](https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12101592)

---

- [[Bibliography merge|Merge multiple bibliographies]]
