---
title: >
  Homework 1 : Linear Algebra and Floating Point Arithmetic  
aliases: 
date: 2024-08-23
tags: 
description:
---
Correspondent lab lectures: [[SMMAI-labs Lecture1|1]], [[SMMAI-labs Lecture2|2]], [[SMMAI-labs Lecture3|3]]
- [New version](https://devangelista2.github.io/statistical-mathematical-methods/Homeworks/HW1.html) #todo check for changes


# HW 1: Linear Algebra and Floating Point Arithmetic

> The submission of the homeworks has **NO** deadline. You can submit them whenever you want, on Virtuale. You are only required to upload it on Virtuale **BEFORE** your exam session, since the Homeworks will be a central part of the oral exam. 
> 
> You are asked to submit the homework as one of the two, following modalities: 
> - * A PDF (or Word) document, containing screenshoots of code snippets, screeshots of the results generated by your code, and a brief comment on the obtained results.
> - * A Python Notebook (i.e. a `.ipynb` file), with cells containing the code required to solve the indicated exercises, alternated with a brief comment on the obtained results in the form of a markdown cell. We remark that the code **SHOULD NOT** be runned during the exam, but the student is asked to enter the exam with all the programs **already executed**, with the results clearly visible on the screen.
> 
> Joining the oral exam with a non-executed code **OR** without a PDF file with the obtained results visible on that, will cause the student to be rejected.

### Direct Methods for the solution of Linear Systems
1. Given a matrix $A \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$, the vector $x_{true} = (1,1,...,1)^T \in \mathbb{R}^n$, and a value for $n$, write a script that:
    - Computes the right-hand side of the linear system $y = A x_{true}$ (test problem).
    - Computes the condition number in 2-norm of the matrix $A$. It is ill-conditioned? What if we use the $\infty$-norm instead of the 2-norm?
    - Solves the linear system $Ax = y$ with the function `np.linalg.solve()`.
    - Computes the relative error between the computed solution and the true solution $x_{true}$.
    - Plot a graph (using `matplotlib.pyplot`) with the relative errors as a function of $n$ and (in a different window) the condition number in 2-norm and in $\infty$-norm, as a function of $n$.

2. Test the program above with the following choices of $A \in \mathbb{R}^{n \times n}$:
    - A random matrix (created with the function `np.random.rand()`) with size varying in $n = \{10, 20, 30, ..., 100\}$.
    - The Vandermonde matrix (`np.vander`) with dimension $n= \{5,10,15,20,25,30\}$ with respect to the vector $v = {1,2,3,...,n}$.
    - The Hilbert matrix (`scipy.linalg.hilbert`) with dimension $n= \{4, 5, 6, ..., 12\}$.

### Floating point arithmetic

1. The Machine epsilon $\epsilon$ is defined as the smallest floating point number such that it holds: $fl(1 + \epsilon) > 1$. Compute $\epsilon$. *Tips:* use a `while` structure.

2. Let’s consider the sequence $a_n = (1 + \frac{1}{n})^n$. It is well known that: $\lim_{n \to \infty} a_n = e$, where $e$ is the Nepero number. Choose diﬀerent values for $n$, compute $a_n$ and compare it to the real value of the Nepero number. What happens if you choose a large value of $n$?

3. Let’s consider the matrices:

$$
A = \begin{bmatrix} 4 & 2 \\ 1 & 3 \end{bmatrix} \quad B = \begin{bmatrix} 4 & 2 \\ 2 & 1 \end{bmatrix}
$$
 Compute the rank of $A$ and $B$ and their eigenvalues. Are $A$ and $B$ full-rank matrices? Can you infer some relationship between the values of the eigenvalues and the full-rank condition? Please, corroborate your deduction with other examples. *Tips:* Please, have a look at `np.linalg`.

---
Other assignments:
- [[SMMAI Homework 2|Homework 2]]
- [[SMMAI Homework 3|Homework 3]]
- [[SMMAI Homework 4|Homework 4]]