---
title: >
  The General Circulation of the Oceans
aliases: 
date: 2024-09-29
tags: 
description:
original: https://wanderer.cmcc.it/chp65chap.html
draft: true
---
#todo #fix #images #clean
The oceans show a general circulation similar to the atmospheric because
together they contribue to the equilibium energy balance of the planet.
The spherical symmetry of the atmosphere is lost because the presence of
the continents fragment the circulation and impose important constraints
on the circulation. On the other hand they are also a powerful system to
transfer momentum from the rotating solid planet to the fluid envelopes.
We will illustrate the ocean structure and circulation using the Global
Reanalaysis from @cipollone2021teco that uses powerful methods to blend
observations and dynamical constraints to obtain a consistent picture of
the fields.

The ocean circulation is shaped by powerful forces, both dynamical and
thermodynamical. The energy balance at the surface has been shown in the
previous chapter, but the wind at the surface is certainly a dominant
factor. Fig. `fig:600`{.interpreted-text role="numref"} show the
streamlines in both seasons of the wind very close to the surface at the
pressure level of 1000mb that over the ocean is very close to the
surface. The color is proportional to the modulus of the wind vector,
i.e. the speed.

![](./pictures/Wind1000.png)

## The thermal structure of the Ocean

The temperature structure of the oceans is shown in Fig.
`fig:610`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. The top panel shows the
temperature near the surface at a nominal depth of 5m. We notice that
there is a strong latitudinal gradient as the equatorial zone tends to
have warmer temperatures and colder areas develop towards the polar
areas. It is simple to connect this structure with the radiation balance
indicating a positive balance in the equatorial zone and a negative one
in the polar regions.

However, the latitudinal structure is broken in several areas. There are
significant gradients along the Equator both in the Pacific and in the
Atlantic basins and in general the East side of the basin tend to be
colder than the West side. Furthermore significant cold area exist along
the Equator in the Pacific in the East and along the South American
coast. A careful analysis shows that also in the midlatitudes there are
strong East-West differences, as the East side of the basins tend to be
warmer than the West. And just to avoid confusion we have to become
familiar with the fact that the East side of an ocean basin is bordering
with the *West coasts* of the respective continent.

![](./pictures/ocean/Temp5-1000.png)

At the deeper depth pf 1000m (bottom panel) the ocean tends to be much
colder. We are using here the same scale to give a feeling of the
temperature drop. We can see that the general signature of the structure
that we have identified at the surface is still present, but there are
some interesting deviations.

In the North Atlantic the water is significantly warmer than the same
latitudes in the Pacific and it is easy to see that the origin of the
water is the Mediterranean that is contributing very warm waters to the
Atlantic via the Gibraltar Straits. The Mediterranean water penetrate
deeply into the Atlantic, basically up to the American coast.

![](./pictures/ocean/Temp2200-3200.png)

Going even deeper (Fig. `fig:611`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}) we
have to change drastically the temperature scale. The typical
temperature is now only a few degrees. The Southern Ocean is very cold
and the water is hovering around 1.0 degree. The abyssal waters (Fig.
`fig:612`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}) are definitely colder and it
is only the pressure that keeps them from freezing when they get close
to zero degrees. We cam also see empirically how the average depth of
the oceans is close to 4000 meter as there are only limited areas that
reach deeper depths. A precise, quantitative calculation will yield the
value of 4200? meters for the average depth of the oceans.

![](./pictures/ocean/Temp4200-5200.png)

A qualitative look at this pictures already gives the impression of the
diversity among the various Oceans. We can guess that the dynamics of
the Souther Ocean, colder and basically unimpeded by continental
boundaries in a single circle around the South Pole is probably going to
be different from all others. By the same token, the warmer Atlantic,
deeply affected by the Mediterranean inflow is going to show different
characteristics from the Northern Pacific, colder and larger.

A closer look will reveal further differences between the mid-latitude
oceans and the tropical oceans. Looking at the North Atlantic (Fig.
`fig:613`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}) we notice the strong
gradients along the North American Coast that persists up to 1000m.
Strong temperature gradients are presumably to be connected to the
existence of currents, but we will need to check the density, depending
on the salinity later, to be really sure. Anyway, this picture is giving
a strong indication of the existence of something remarkable and intense
along the western boundary of the Atlantic ocean.

![](./pictures/ocean/Gulf1000.png)

Warm waters are protruding from the Gibraltar Straits into the Atlantic.
They are not very visible at the surface, but they are remarkably well
clear at depth, for instance the 100m shown here. The warm water is
sinking, indicating that its density is higher than the surrounding
water, notwithstanding the higher temperature.

The North Pacific shows something similar along the Japan coast and
therefore we can start to suspect that this has to do with the presence
of the continental boundary. Without the Mediterranean, the vertical
structure is more uniform and we can notice a progressive cooling of the
water.

![](./pictures/ocean/Kur1000.png)

The preliminary analysis is giving us hints of a strong vertical
structure of the oceans, soit may be useful to look at the vertical
distribution somewhat more in detail. Fig. `fig:6100`{.interpreted-text
role="numref"} shows a North-South section along the longitude of 25W,
roughly in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean. The bottom panel reaches to
5000m, it is very evident the strong stratification of the ocean. An
area of high variation, where the temperature cools down quickly,
appears around 800-1000m, more prominent in the Southern Hemisphere,
below that the ocean is more uniform and very cold. This sharp
transition region is called *thermocline*.

It is interesting to note how layers of water of the same temperature
can reach the surface, as it can be seen from the picture and, in more
detail, from the top panel. The layers connect even considerable depths,
like is the case for the very cold water around 2-4 C that rises from
the bottom of the Southern Ocean surfacing into the Antarctic region.

![](./pictures/ocean/Sect25W1000.png)

![](./pictures/ocean/Sect25W5000.png)

The signature of the Mediterranean outflow can be seen in the asymmetry
between the hemispheres that pushes relatively warmer water down in the
Northern Atlantic relatively to the Southern part of the ocean.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Sect140W1000.png" id="fig:6101"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/Sect140W1000.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:6100</code> but for 140W longitude</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Sect140W5000.png" id="fig:6101a"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/Sect140W5000.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:6100a</code> but for 140W longitude</figcaption>
</figure>

Looking at a similar section in the middle of the Pacific Ocean at 140W
longitude we see a different situation. The relatively warm waters are
confined to a much shallower region confined to the subtropics. In this
basin is also more noticeable a phenomenon that was present also in the
Atlantic, namely the raising of cold water in the equatorial region that
is the signature of the cold tongue of equatorial water that lays in the
equatorial Pacific Ocean. Also in this case the layers of different
temperature reach the surface at different latitudes. Especially in the
Southern Hemisphere is possible to see the deep, cold abyssal water
connecting with the surface at very high southern latitudes.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Sect90E1000.png" id="fig:6102"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/Sect90E1000.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:6100</code> but for 90E longitude</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Sect90E5000.png" id="fig:6102a"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/Sect90E5000.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:6100a</code> but for 90E longitude</figcaption>
</figure>

The Indian Ocean (Fig. `fig:6102`{.interpreted-text role="numref"})
shown here as a section cutting essentially through the Bay of Bengal,
shows a similar strong stratification, but there are only weak signs of
an equatorial upwelling of cold water.

![](./pictures/ocean/SectEquator1000.png)

We can gain more insights in the equatorial structure by looking at a
longitudinal section along the Equator in the Pacific (Fig.
`fig:6103`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}). The thermocline is clearly
visible, but there is a clear east-west inclination of the thermocline
with a significant deepening in the West Pacific and a mush shallower
layer in the East, close to the South American coast. The thermal
gradient is really strong and it crosses several degrees in a few tens
of meters.

## The salinity structure of the Ocean

The salinity structure of the oceans is shown in Fig.
`fig:710`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. The top panel shows the
salinity near the surface at a nominal depth of 5m. We notice that there
is a complex structure with low salinity (fresher) waters at the poles
and progressively more saline water moving towards the Equator, but then
salinity decreases again at the equator. It is probably instructive to
look at the latitudinal distribution of the precipitation (Fig.
`fig:70a`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}). We can notice that the
peaks of precipitation in the midlatitude and at the Equator are
correlated with the low-salinity areas, whereas the subtropical regions
are regions of strong evaporation, whose signature is the high salinity
of the surface waters.

The Pacific Ocean is fresher than the Atlantic or even the Indian Ocean.
We can see from the map at 1000m that sources of saline waters are
marginal seas like the Mediterranean and the Persian Gulf. These areas
are evaporative basins that produce water so saline that it dominates
over the temperature effect and becomes denser so that we can find
Mediterranean water nelow the surface.

![](./pictures/ocean/Sal5-1000.png)

The effect of the precipitation is less visible at the deeper depth pf
1000m (bottom panel), where the ocean tends to be fresher and more
uniform. We are using here the same scale to give a feeling of the
changes in salinity, except for the Atlantic and the east Indian Ocean,
the salinity is around 34 psu. The situation does not change much lower
down (Fig. `fig:7110`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}).

The effect of the runoff from major river systems is visible along the
Atlantic coast of South America where the Amazon river discharges and in
the Bay of Bengal and around Indochina from the run-off the major rivers
there, the Ganges and the Mekong.

![](./pictures/ocean/Sal2200-3200.png)

Going even deeper (Fig. `fig:712`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}) we
have to change drastically the scale. The oceans are remarkably uniform
and the salinity deviations are really small.

![](./pictures/ocean/Sal4200-5200.png)

Looking at the North Atlantic (Fig. `fig:713`{.interpreted-text
role="numref"}) we notice that there is a strong salinity gradient along
the North American Coast that follows roughly the pattern of the
temperature gradient in Fig. `fig:613`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}.
Strong temperature gradients are presumably to be connected to the
existence of currents, but we will need to check the density, depending
on the salinity later, to be really sure. Anyway, this picture is giving
a strong indication of the existence of something remarkable and intense
along the western boundary of the Atlantic ocean.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/SGulf5.png" id="fig:713" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/SGulf5.png" />
<figcaption>Northern Atlantic salinity for the ocean at 5m.</figcaption>
</figure>

A similar situation exist in the North Pacific along the Japan coast and
therefore we can start to suspect that this has to do with the presence
of the continental boundary.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/SKur5.png" id="fig:714" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/SKur5.png" />
<figcaption>Northern Pacific Salinity for the ocean at 5m.</figcaption>
</figure>

The previous analysis of the temperature is giving us hints of a strong
vertical structure of the oceans, so it may be useful to look at the
vertical distribution somewhat more in detail. Fig.
`fig:7100`{.interpreted-text role="numref"} shows the same section
North-South section of Fig. `fig:6100`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}
along the longitude of 25W, roughly in the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.
The salinity follows the a similar pattern as the temperature with a
strong gradient approximately at the thermocline, the high salinity is
confined in thin ;layers at the surface, but some interesting behaviour
is visible below. In the Northern Hemisphere we can see the
Mediterranean water penetrating at depth and actually protruding under
the fresher water of Antarctic origin that is colder, but because is
fresher floats over the Mediterranean water. Really cold Antarctic water
reaches the bottom, filling the abyssal plains of the basin.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/SectSal25W5000.png" id="fig:7100"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/SectSal25W5000.png" />
<figcaption>North-South Salinity section at 25W longitude.</figcaption>
</figure>

The Mediterranean waters are clearly visible in a longitude-depth
section (Fig. `fig:71000`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}). The saline
mediterranean water sinks to about 1000m because it is warmer than the
Atlantic but much more saline so it is denser and it reaches an
equilibrium depth at about 1000m.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/SectSalinity32N3000.png" id="fig:71000"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/SectSalinity32N3000.png" />
<figcaption>Longitude depth section about 32N in the Atlantic
Ocean.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/SectSal140W5000.png" id="fig:7101"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/SectSal140W5000.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:7100</code> but for 140W longitude</figcaption>
</figure>

The vertical structure of the Pacific Ocean (Fig.
`fig:7101`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}) is different and what we
see is a situation where salinity is slowly varying getting fresher
toward the surface, with the thin saline water in the subtropics a clear
signature of the equatorial upwelling and the Antarctic water filling
the abyssal plains. The Indian Ocean is similar to the Pacific South of
the Equator but North of the Equator at this longitude is fresher.

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/SectSal90E5000.png" id="fig:7102"
style="width:100.0%" alt="./pictures/ocean/SectSal90E5000.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:7100</code> but for 90E longitude</figcaption>
</figure>

The Indian Ocean (Fig. `fig:7102`{.interpreted-text role="numref"})
shown here as a section cutting essentially through the Bay of Bengal,
shows a similar strong stratification, but there are only weak signs of
an equatorial upwelling of cold water.

![](./pictures/ocean/SectSalinityEquator1000.png)

We can gain more insights in the equatorial structure by looking at a
longitudinal section along the Equator in the Pacific (Fig.
`fig:7103`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}). Here we see the general
difference between the Atlantic and the Pacific, but we also see that
the salinity is following the slant of the equatorial thermocline and
the equatorial upwelling in the East Pacific. The effect of the major
precipitation center of ITCZ in the West Pacific is visible in fresh
water at the surface in the West.

## Ocean Currents

### The overall basin circulation

The surface currents of the Atlantic ocean are shown in Fig.
`fig:8100`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. As we might have suspected
from the temperature structure there is a strong northward current along
the North American coast that reaches all the way across the North
Atlantic to Europe, the Gulf Stream. Strong currents are also visible in
the Equatorial area where they connect to the mid-latitude circulation
forming a large circular system, the Subtropical Gyre. The South
Atlantic has a similar gyre in the subtropical region, but at higher
latitudes we can notice a strong westerly current cutting all along the
basin, essentially along a latitude line between 40S and 50S.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mGLOBNA.png)

The North Pacific surface circulation is shown in Fig.
`fig:8101`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. We can notice here again a
strong current along the Western boundary of the basin that than feed
into a basin wide gyre that connects to the equatorial circulation. The
boundary current, known her as the Kuroshio Current, is very narrow and
intense along the Japan coast, as it is also the case of the Gulf Stream
in the Atlantic, and it tapers into a wide system of streams and eddies
into the open ocean.

It is possible to see also local system, like the small gyre off the
Alaskan coast and similar circulation in the marginal seas, like the Sea
of Okhotsk, near the Siberian coast. Their presence is remarkable as we
are looking here at climatological averages over more than 40 years and
so they are stable and persistent features. This is another reminder of
how even relatively smaller feature in the ocean can be climatologically
persistent over many years.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mGLOBNP.png)

The circulation of the South Pacific Ocean is shown in Fig.
`fig:8102`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. The subtropical gyre is
visible also here, but there is a weak indication of a western
intensification current in the West pacific, close to the coasts of
Australia and New Zealand. The strong high latitude current that we have
seen in the Atlantic is aldo present here end evidently connect to the
other basin through the Drake Passage, that is the Straits between South
America and Antarctica.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mGLOBSP.png)

The Indian Ocean circulation is shown in Fig.
`fig:8103`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. The Indian Ocean is
confined by continental masses in the north, so it is mostly composed of
the equatorial region and the midlatitudes are all in the Southern
Hemisphere. The subtropical gyre is present, together with features
North of Madagascar. A boundary current develops on the African coast,
The westerly current in the southern mid-latitudes is visible also here,
strong and with a vigorous eddy field.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mGLOBIND.png)

At this point we can suspect that there is probably a continuous ring of
currents around Antarctica and this can be confirmed by the bottom panel
of Fig. `fig:8103`{.interpreted-text role="numref"} that shows the
entire extent around a longitude circle of the current, known as the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current. It is a strong, highly turbulent system
that connects all the Ocean Basins.

### The equatorial circulation

The Equator is a special place for the atmosphere and so it is a special
place also for the Oceans. The circulation in this area is strongly
coupled with the atmospheric circulation and it is often characterized
by both westerly and easterly currents and by special behaviours right
at the Equator line. Futhermore, it is also very different from ocean to
ocean.

The equatorial current system in the Pacific Ocean is shown in Fig.
`fig:8106`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. It is a complex system
composed of two easterly currents, the North and South Equatorial
currents, sandwiching the westerly Equatorial countercurrent. It is
possible to notice that at the Equator the currents are strongly
easterly and diverging, leading to the emergence of upwelling at the
Equator by Ekman transport.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mPac.png)

The complexity of the equatorial current system can be further
appreciated by looking at the vertical section of the zonal current at
the Equator (Fig. `fig:8107`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}) A strong
westerly current below the surface, slanting from the West Pacific to
the East Pacific, is visible at depth between 200 and 300m. The speed is
in excess of 1 m/s and it gets progressively shallower in the East.

It is however part of an alternation of westerly and easterly currents
that become progressively weaker as they get deeper. They are centered
almost perfectly at the Equator, as it can be seen in Fig.
`fig:8108`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}. The latitudinal position of
the undercurrent is very tightly controlled by rotational effects and it
precisely tracks the position of the equatorial line.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/SectZonal_CurrentEquator1000.png)

The equatorial Atlantic Ocean surface circulation (Fig.
`fig:8109`{.interpreted-text role="numref"}). It is possible to see the
easterly South Equatorial Current that is straddling the Equator between
5S and 5N. The North equatorial Countercurrent is westerly and it covers
the area between 5N and 10N, and the weaker North Equatorial Current is
located at northern latitudes. The equatorial flow is divergent and also
in this case we can presume the existence of upwelling at the Equator. A
strong coastal current is visible as the Guinea Current, in the Gulf of
Guinea. The South Equatorial Current feeds into the North Brazilian
Current that then flows northward along the South America coast, taking
different names as it finally emerges as the Caribbean Current in the
Caribbean sea.

A similar structure of alternating westerly and easterly undercurrents
exist also in the equatorial Atlantic (Fig. `fig:8108`{.interpreted-text
role="numref"}), but it is weaker and only the first westerly maximum is
well visible. It is also slanting towards the East, but the maximum is
reached more towards the western boundary of the basin with respect to
the Pacific Ocean. The deeper easterly jets are also much less weaker.
The undercurrents jets are essentially absent in the Indian Ocean.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/SectZonal_Current160W1000.png)

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mATLEQ.png)

### The Gulf Stream

The current system of the Gulf Stream is one of the major feature of the
global ocean circulation. It is shown in Fig.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mATLCARIB.png)

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream800mATLCARIB.png"
id="fig:8110bb" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream800mATLCARIB.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8110aa</code>, but at 800m depth.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1100mATLCARIB.png"
id="fig:8110cc" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1100mATLCARIB.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8110aa</code>, but at 1100m depth.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1700mATLCARIB.png"
id="fig:8110dd" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1700mATLCARIB.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8110aa</code>, but at 1700m depth.</figcaption>
</figure>

### The Kuroshio

The current system of the Kuroshio is one of the major feature of the
global ocean circulation. It is shown in Fig.

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mKur.png)

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream800mKUR.png" id="fig:8111bb"
style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream800mKUR.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8111aa</code>, but at 800m depth.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1100mKUR.png"
id="fig:8111cc" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1100mKUR.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8111aa</code>, but at 1100m depth.</figcaption>
</figure>

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1700mKUR.png"
id="fig:8111dd" style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream1700mKUR.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8111aa</code>, but at 1700m depth.</figcaption>
</figure>

### The upwelling zones

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mSATemp.png)

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVstream5mAFRemp.png)

### The Somali Current

![](./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVvec5mSOMSUM.png)

<figure>
<img src="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVvec5mSOMWIN.png" id="fig:8113b"
style="width:100.0%"
alt="./pictures/ocean/Currents/UVvec5mSOMWIN.png" />
<figcaption>As in Fig. <code class="interpreted-text"
role="numref">fig:8113a</code>, but for Summer.</figcaption>
</figure>
